add blog post 'Falcoctl: install and manage your rules and plugins' (#827)
falcosecurity/falco-website: content/en/blog/falcoctl-basic-usages.md/index.md

The Falco maintainers proposed the following solution to help with these issues: [`falcoctl`](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl). Falcoctl is a CLI tool that performs several useful tasks for Falco.

This blog post describes key concepts around `falcoctl` to help you get started.

- [Glossary](#glossary)
- [Use falcoctl locally](#use-falcoctl-locally)
  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Index](#index)
  - [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Search for artifacts](#search-for-artifacts)
  - [Installation of artifacts](#installation-of-artifacts)
    - [Installation of Rules](#installation-of-rules)
    - [Installation of Plugins](#installation-of-plugins)
    - [Follow artifacts](#follow-artifacts)
      - [Systemd service](#systemd-service)
- [Use falcoctl in Kubernetes with Helm](#use-falcoctl-in-kubernetes-with-helm)
  - [Add the official Helm repo](#add-the-official-helm-repo)
  - [Configure the installation and followed by the artifacts](#configure-the-installation-and-followed-by-the-artifacts)
  - [Disable falcoctl in the chart](#disable-falcoctl-in-the-chart)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

> # Glossary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Glossary
```

Before diving into all the details, here's a glossary of the key words to understand how `falcoctl` works. An exhaustive list can be found in the [README](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl/blob/main/README.md).

- `Artifact`: An artifact is an element `falcoctl` can manipulate, right now, only `rules` and `plugins` are considered.
- `Index`: A .yaml file containing a list of available artifacts with their registries and repositories. An automatic generic index is provided for official artifacts, see [here](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl/tree/gh-pages).
- `Registry`: A registry stores the artifacts, that `falcoctl` understands in regards to the [OCI standard](https://opencontainers.org/), any compliant OCI can be used. The official registry uses [Github Packages](https://github.com/orgs/falcosecurity/packages).
- `Repository`: similar to containers, it belongs to a registry and contains one or more versions (tags) of an artifact.

> # Use falcoctl locally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use falcoctl locally
```

The following steps explain the basic concepts used to install `falcoctl` locally.

> ## Installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installation
```

For a Linux amd64 system:
```shell
LATEST=$(curl -sI https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl/releases/latest | awk '/location: /{gsub("\r","",$2);split($2,v,"/");print substr(v[8],2)}')
curl --fail -LS "https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl/releases/download/v${LATEST}/falcoctl_${LATEST}_linux_amd64.tar.gz" | tar -xz
sudo install -o root -g root -m 0755 falcoctl /usr/local/bin/falcoctl
```

> Other environments are described in the [README](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl#install-falcoctl-manually)

You can now check the installation went well.
Check the version:
```shell
❯ falcoctl version

Client Version: 0.4.0
```
Print the help:
```shell
❯ falcoctl --help

     __       _                _   _
    / _| __ _| | ___ ___   ___| |_| |
   | |_ / _  | |/ __/ _ \ / __| __| |
   |  _| (_| | | (_| (_) | (__| |_| |
   |_|  \__,_|_|\___\___/ \___|\__|_|
									
	
The official CLI tool for working with Falco and its ecosystem components

Usage:
  falcoctl [command]

Available Commands:
  artifact    Interact with Falco artifacts
  completion  Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell

>   help        Help about any command

Author: This a typo in the falcoctl readme, we need to fix in at the source. too.

  index       Interact with index
  registry    Interact with OCI registries
  tls         Generate and install TLS material for Falco
  version     Print the falcoctl version information

Flags:
      --config string     config file to be used for falcoctl (default "/etc/falcoctl/falcoctl.yaml")

>       --disable-styling   Disable output styling such as spinners, progress bars and colors. Styling is automatically disabled if not attacched to a tty (default false)

Author: This a typo in the falcoctl readme, we need to fix in at the source. too.

  -h, --help              help for falcoctl
  -v, --verbose           Enable verbose logs (default false)

Use "falcoctl [command] --help" for more information about a command.

```

> ## Index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Index
```

Before being able to download and install artifacts, we need to configure an index, we provide one for all [official artifacts](https://falcosecurity.github.io/falcoctl/index.yaml) (plugins and rules):

```shell
sudo falcoctl index add falcosecurity https://falcosecurity.github.io/falcoctl/index.yaml
```

To confirm the installation:
```
❯ sudo falcoctl index list

NAME            URL                                                     ADDED                   UPDATED
falcosecurity   https://falcosecurity.github.io/falcoctl/index.yaml     2023-02-14 14:57:33     2023-02-14 15:48:43
```

The index is not automatically updated, when a new artifact is added to the list, you can refresh your local cache with:
```shell
sudo falcoctl index update falcosecurity
```

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuration
```

The default configuration of `falcoctl` is `/etc/falcoctl/falcoctl.yaml`, as it can store secrets, like credentials to private registries, the file is protected by default.

```shell
❯ sudo cat /etc/falcoctl/falcoctl.yaml

indexes:
- name: falcosecurity
  url: https://falcosecurity.github.io/falcoctl/index.yaml
```

> To know more about available settings, see the official [docs](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falcoctl/blob/gh-pages/index.yaml).

> ## Search for artifacts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Search for artifacts
```

INDEX        	ARTIFACT   	TYPE     	REGISTRY	REPOSITORY
falcosecurity	falco-rules	rulesfile	ghcr.io 	falcosecurity/rules/falco-rules
```

```shell
❯ sudo falcoctl artifact search kubernetes

INDEX           ARTIFACT        TYPE            REGISTRY        REPOSITORY
falcosecurity   k8saudit        plugin          ghcr.io         falcosecurity/plugins/plugin/k8saudit
falcosecurity   k8saudit-rules  rulesfile       ghcr.io         falcosecurity/plugins/ruleset/k8saudit
```

> Note the `TYPE` column to determine the kind of artifact.

The search is made through names and keywords as we can find them in the `index.yaml`:
```yaml
- name: k8saudit
  type: plugin
  registry: ghcr.io
  repository: falcosecurity/plugins/plugin/k8saudit
  description: Read Kubernetes Audit Events and monitor Kubernetes Clusters
  home: https://github.com/falcosecurity/plugins/tree/master/plugins/k8saudit
  keywords:
    - audit
    - audit-log
    - audit-events
    - kubernetes
  license: Apache-2.0
  maintainers:
    - email: cncf-falco-dev@lists.cncf.io
      name: The Falco Authors
  sources:
    - https://github.com/falcosecurity/plugins/tree/master/plugins/k8saudit
```

> ## Installation of artifacts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installation of artifacts
```

> ### Installation of Rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Installation of Rules
```

 INFO  Pulling 4383c69ba0ad: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling 2c6ca9f7dac5: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Artifact successfully installed in "/etc/falco"                                                                                                            
 INFO  Preparing to pull "ghcr.io/falcosecurity/plugins/plugin/json:0.6.0"
 INFO  Pulling 65a28b294bff: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling 15fb7eddd978: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling f4ca8f34ad16: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Artifact successfully installed in "/usr/share/falco/plugins"                                                                                              
 INFO  Preparing to pull "ghcr.io/falcosecurity/plugins/plugin/k8saudit:0.5.0"
 INFO  Pulling 3e249d372a35: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling c4abb288df01: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling 5e5cfe270518: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Artifact successfully installed in "/usr/share/falco/plugins"
```

> ### Installation of Plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Installation of Plugins
```

Like rules, plugins can be installed with one simple command:

```shell
❯ sudo falcoctl artifact install github

 INFO  Reading all configured index files from "/root/.config/falcoctl/indexes.yaml"
 INFO  Resolving dependencies ...
 INFO  Installing the following artifacts: [ghcr.io/falcosecurity/plugins/plugin/github:latest]
 INFO  Preparing to pull "ghcr.io/falcosecurity/plugins/plugin/github:latest"
 INFO  Pulling 19dc1c0f62a0: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling d97aadfc1199: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Pulling 5b9143db2a1d: ############################################# 100%
 INFO  Artifact successfully installed in "/usr/share/falco/plugins"
```

Easy!

> ### Follow artifacts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Follow artifacts
```

A great feature of `falcoctl` is its ability to run as daemon to periodically check the artifacts' repositories and automatically install new versions.
The configuration of the behavior in also in `/etc/falcoctl/falcoctl.yaml`

```yaml
indexes:
  - name: falcosecurity
    url: https://falcosecurity.github.io/falcoctl/index.yaml
artifact:
  install:
    refs:
      - k8saudit:0.5.0
  follow:
    every: 6h0m0s
    falcoVersions: http://localhost:8765/versions
    refs:
      - k8saudit:-rules:0.5
```

The `install` section lists the referencies of the artifacts we want to install at deployment of `falcoctl`.
The `follow` section lists those we want to automatically update, with a check with `every` as frequency.

> Some plugins and rules versions depend of the `falco` version, `falcoctl` requests `falco` on its `/versions` API endpoint to gather the intel, this is why we have the `falcoVersions` field in the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some plugins and rules versions depend on the `falco` version, `falcoctl` request, and the `falco` type of `/versions` and API endpoint that gather intel, this is why we have the `falcoVersions` field in the configuration.
```

> We do not advise to disable the plugins, as they are binaries, and could lead to security breaks.

> #### Systemd service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Systemd service
```

> > We strictly disadvise to follow the plugins, as they are binaries, it could lead to security fleas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> We do not advise to disable the plugins, as they are binaries, and could lead to security breaks.
```
not sure if this what you were trying to say

> To help you setting up `falcoctl` as a daemon, here's a systemd service template `/etc/systemd/system/falcoctl.service`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To help you set up `falcoctl` as a daemon, here's a systemd service template `/etc/systemd/system/falcoctl.service`:
```

```toml
[Unit]
Description=Falcoctl
After=network.target
StartLimitIntervalSec=0

[Service]
Type=simple
Restart=always
RestartSec=1
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/falcoctl artifact follow
```
To enable/start the new service:
```shell
❯ systemctl enable falcoctl
❯ systemctl start falcoctl
❯ systemctl status falcoctl

● falcoctl.service - Falcoctl
     Loaded: loaded (/etc/systemd/system/falcoctl.service; static)
     Active: active (running) since Thu 2023-02-16 16:46:32 CET; 1h ago
   Main PID: 567876 (falcoctl)
      Tasks: 9 (limit: 38132)
     Memory: 6.8M
        CPU: 15ms
     CGroup: /system.slice/falcoctl.service
             └─567876 /usr/local/bin/falcoctl artifact follow
```

> # Use falcoctl in Kubernetes with Helm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use falcoctl in Kubernetes with Helm
```

The last version of the `falco` `helm` chart, [`v3.0.0`](https://github.com/falcosecurity/charts/blob/master/falco/CHANGELOG.md#v300) includes `falcoctl` as an init container and sidecar, to accordingly install and follow artifacts.

> ## Add the official Helm repo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add the official Helm repo
```

Nothing new under the sun, a classic `helm` command:
```shell
helm repo add falcosecurity https://falcosecurity.github.io/charts
helm repo update
```

> ## Configure the installation and followed by the artifacts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure the installation and followed by the artifacts
```

> ## Configure the installation and following of artifacts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configure the installation and followed by the artifacts
```

> Like any other values, we can set the `values.yaml` fields to choose the [artifacts to install and follow](https://github.com/falcosecurity/charts/blob/master/falco/values.yaml#L331) and the index we use for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like any other values, we can set the `values.yaml` field to choose the [artifacts to install and follow](https://github.com/falcosecurity/charts/blob/master/falco/values.yaml#L331) the index we use for.
```

```yaml
...
falcoctl:
  artifact:
    install:
      enabled: true
    follow:
      enabled: true
  config:
    indexes:
    - name: falcosecurity
      url: https://falcosecurity.github.io/falcoctl/index.yaml
    artifact:
      allowedTypes:
        - rulesfile
        - plugin
      install:
        resolveDeps: true
        refs: [k8saudit-rules:0.5, falco-rules:0]
      follow:
        refs: [k8saudit-rules:0.5, falco-rules:0]
        every: 6h
...
```

> > The `resolveDeps: true` avoid to list the plugin to install, they will be automatically installed with the rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The `resolveDeps: true` avoids listing the plugin at install, and will be automatically installed with the rules.
```

> Here's the finale command to bootstrap a very basic installation with these settings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's the final command to bootstrap a very basic installation with these settings:
```

```shell
helm install falco -n falco -f values.yaml falcosecurity/falco --create-namespace
```

## Disable falcoctl in the chart

> If for some reasons you don't want to use `falcoctl` to manage the artificats, you can disable its installation by providing these settings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If for some reason you don't want to use `falcoctl` to manage artifacts, you can disable its installation by following these steps:
```

```shell
helm install falco \
    --set falcoctl.artifact.install.enabled=false \
    --set falcoctl.artifact.follow.enabled=false
```

> # Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```

In this blog post we saw the basics to use `falcoctl` locally and in our Kubernetes clusters with `helm`. It helps for sure to manage the lifecycle of the rules and the plugins, moreover its development is strongly active and more and more features and enhancements will be added. 

> More posts will also be out soon to detail more advanced usages, like using private registries or create its own artifacts. Stay tuned!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More posts will also be out soon to detail more advanced usages, like using private registries or creating your own artifacts. Stay tuned!
```

---

> As usual, if you have any feedback or need help, you can find us at any of the following locations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Per usual, if you have any feedback or need help, you can find us at any of the following locations.
```
